add attention post (#150)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2021-03-19-forecasting-time-series-with-torch_4/forecasting_4.Rmd

---
title: "torch time series, season one, final episode: Attention"
description: > 

>   We conclude our mini-series on time series forecasting with torch by augmenting last time's sequence-to-sequence architecture with a technique both immensely popular in natural language processing (NLP) and inspired by human (and animal) cognition: attention.

Author: right! And I explicitly _searched_ for time series (without the hyphen), and _still_ missed it!! sorry!

    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/
slug: keydanatorchts4
date: 03-19-2021
categories:
  - Torch
  - R
  - Time Series
bibliography: bibliography.bib
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
    toc: true
preview: images/preview.jpg
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

You're reading the final post in a four-part introduction to time-series forecasting with `torch`. It's been the story of a quest for multiple-step prediction, and by now, we've seen three different approaches: forecasting in a loop, incorporating an MLP, and sequence-to-sequence models. Here's a quick recap.

-   As one should when one sets out for an adventurous journey, we [started](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2021-03-10-forecasting-time-series-with-torch_1/) with an in-depth study of the tools at our disposal: recurrent neural networks (RNNs). We trained a model to predict the very next observation in line, and then, thought of a clever hack: How about we use this for multi-step prediction, feeding back individual predictions in a loop? The result , it turned out, was quite acceptable.

> -   [Then](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2021-03-11-forecasting-time-series-with-torch_2/), the adventure really started. We built our first model "natively" for multi-step prediction, relieving the RNN a bit of its workload and involving a second player, a tiny-ish multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Now, it was the MLP's task to project RNN output to several time points in the future. Although results were pretty satisfactory, we didn't stop there.

Author: yeah, I mean, it's not _that_ devoid of meaning ;-) ... it refers to that being the first post that does not apply a workaround, but tries to solve the problem "genuinely"

> -   Instead, we [applied](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2021-03-16-forecasting-time-series-with-torch_3/) to numerical time series a technique commonly used in natural language processing (NLP): sequence-to-sequence (*seq2seq*) prediction. While forecast performance was not much different from the previous case, we found the technique to be more intuitively appealing, since it reflects the *causal* relationship between successive forecasts.

Author: oh, that's an excellent point. Will change those accordingly!

> Today, we don't replace *seq2seq* by something completely different. Instead, we enrich it, adding in a new component: the so-called *attention* module. Originally introduced around 2014[^1], attention mechanisms have gained enormous traction, so much so that a recent paper title starts out "Attention is Not All You Need"[^2].

Author: yes, you're right, for both ... it does _not_ add value

[^1]: For important papers see: @BahdanauCB14, @VinyalsKKPSH14, @XuBKCCSZB15.

[^2]: @2021arXiv210303404D, thus replying to @2017arXiv170603762V, whose 2017 paper "went viral" for stating the opposite.

> The idea is the following. In the classic encoder-decoder setup, the decoder gets "primed" with an encoder summary just a single time: the time it starts its forecasting loop. From then on, it's on its own. With attention, however, it gets to see the complete sequence of encoder outputs again every time it forecasts a new value. And more than that: Every time, it gets to zoom in on *those* outputs that seem *relevant for the current prediction step*.

Reviewer: Maybe this section should get a header, since it's where you begin explaining the key concept of the post (and it will make it easier for someone to skip to the relevant section).

> The idea is the following. In the classic encoder-decoder setup, the decoder gets "primed" with an encoder summary just a single time: the time it starts its forecasting loop. From then on, it's on its own. With attention, however, it gets to see the complete sequence of encoder outputs again every time it forecasts a new value. And more than that: Every time, it gets to zoom in on *those* outputs that seem *relevant for the current prediction step*.

Author: I'm torn here ... the _what's more_, that is exactly the idiomatic phrase that didn't come to mind, but ...

>The idea is the following.

Yes, I know, I know ... but in a way, that's just my style ... and relatedly,

> Maybe this section should get a header, since it's where you begin explaining the key concept of the post (and it will make it easier for someone to skip to the relevant section).

> The idea is the following. In the classic encoder-decoder setup, the decoder gets "primed" with an encoder summary just a single time: the time it starts its forecasting loop. From then on, it's on its own. With attention, however, it gets to see the complete sequence of encoder outputs again every time it forecasts a new value. And more than that: Every time, it gets to zoom in on *those* outputs that seem *relevant for the current prediction step*.

Reviewer: > I trust readers to assess the relevance (to them) of individual paragraphs

I don't think this is how most readers act. The Nielsen Norman report, [How People Read Online: The Eyetracking Evidence](https://www.nngroup.com/reports/how-people-read-web-eyetracking-evidence/) is long, but the [article here](https://totheweb.com/blog/b2b-content-marketing/how-people-read-on-the-web-a-guide-for-b2b-content-marketing/) is a quick summary.

> The idea is the following. In the classic encoder-decoder setup, the decoder gets "primed" with an encoder summary just a single time: the time it starts its forecasting loop. From then on, it's on its own. With attention, however, it gets to see the complete sequence of encoder outputs again every time it forecasts a new value. And more than that: Every time, it gets to zoom in on *those* outputs that seem *relevant for the current prediction step*.

Author: thanks for the link(s)! I just skimmed (;-)))) the latter, and yes, there's useful advice (part of which I should definitely take into account more often).
But, I do think the content category plays a role, as well.

>They drop-off for a variety of reasons, but far and away the number repellant is a wall of text.

For sure that's true in general, but not necessarily as much here ("a wall", sure, that's bad. But let's say "some occasionally wordy writing" instead.)

For some people, what might be even more repelling is a big amount of "non-text" (math, for example). So when you see a text about ML that's more than math and code, that could be a good thing, too ;-)

Not saying any of those findings are irrelevant, just that one might see some of them in context.

> We can easily see how this is a useful strategy in translation: In generating the next word, a model will need to know what part of the source sentence to focus on. How much the technique helps with numerical sequences, in contrast, will likely depend on the features of the series in question. Meaning: Even if, in our current case, it should turn out to have little effect, it will still be worthwhile just to have learned about the technique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a particularly useful strategy in translation: In generating the next word, a model will need to know what part of the source sentence to focus on. How much the technique helps with numerical sequences, in contrast, will likely depend on the features of the series in question. Meaning: Even if, in our current case, it should turn out to have little effect, it will still be worthwhile just to have learned about the technique.
```

Reviewer: > Meaning: Even if, in our current case, it should turn out to have little effect, it will still be worthwhile just to have learned about the technique.

Do you need this sentence? It feels like this is a case of you justifying why what you're writing is worthwhile, when I'd assume you wouldn't post it were that not the case.

Reviewer: As an aside, the colon-before-a-capitalized-sentence structure is sufficiently rare that I'd try to avoid doing it more than once in a single paragraph.

Author: > Do you need this sentence? It feels like this is a case of you justifying why what you're writing is worthwhile, when I'd assume you wouldn't post it were that not the case.

...  ---> ...

> As an aside, the colon-before-a-capitalized-sentence structure is sufficiently rare that I'd try to avoid doing it more than once in a single paragraph.

OK, you said that more than once, time to get around my stubbornness!!

# Data input

> In this post, as before, we work with `vic_elec`, but this time, we partly deviate from the way we used to employ it. With the original, bi-hourly dataset, training the current model takes a long time, longer than readers will want to wait when experimenting. So instead, we aggregate observations by day. In order not too have too few data, we train on years 2012 and 2013, reserving 2014 for validation as well as post-training inspection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As before, we work with `vic_elec`, but this time, we partly deviate from the way we used to employ it. With the original, bi-hourly dataset, training the current model takes a long time, longer than readers will want to wait when experimenting. So instead, we aggregate observations by day. In order to have enough data, we train on years 2012 and 2013, reserving 2014 for validation as well as post-training inspection.
```

Reviewer: If you decide to keep:
> In order not too have…

the "too" there should be spelled to.

Author: oh yeah, that was a typo - but your suggestion is better anyway

```{r}
vic_elec_daily <- vic_elec %>%
  select(Time, Demand) %>%
  index_by(Date = date(Time)) %>%
  summarise(
    Demand = sum(Demand) / 1e3) 

elec_train <- vic_elec_daily %>% 
  filter(year(Date) %in% c(2012, 2013)) %>%
  as_tibble() %>%
  select(Demand) %>%
  as.matrix()

elec_valid <- vic_elec_daily %>% 
  filter(year(Date) == 2014) %>%
  as_tibble() %>%
  select(Demand) %>%
  as.matrix()

elec_test <- vic_elec_daily %>% 
  filter(year(Date) %in% c(2014), month(Date) %in% 1:4) %>%
  as_tibble() %>%
  select(Demand) %>%
  as.matrix()

train_mean <- mean(elec_train)
train_sd <- sd(elec_train)

```

> We'll attempt to forecast demand up to fourteen days ahead. How long, then, should be the input sequences? As usual, this is a matter of experimentation; all the more now that we're adding in the attention mechanism. (Intuitively, it might not handle very long sequences so well). Below, we go with fourteen days here too, but that may not necessarily be the best possible choice for this series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll attempt to forecast demand up to fourteen days ahead. How long, then, should be the input sequences? This is a matter of experimentation; all the more so now that we're adding in the attention mechanism. (Intuitively, it might not handle very long sequences so well). Below, we go with fourteen days here too, but that may not necessarily be the best possible choice for this series.
```

Reviewer: > Below, we go with fourteen days here too, but that may not necessarily be the best possible choice for this series.

Is this for the input sequence? If so, clarify/make that explicit. It's a bit confusing since _here_ could refer to any of what you do in this post. 

_Intuitively_ is a bit like "easily" or "simply", etc.—if it's not self-evident to the reader (e.g. for me), it doesn't do anything other than make me think that I should know something that I don't. That parenthetical also seems a bit off in terms of its location.

Author: > Intuitively is a bit like "easily" or "simply", etc.—if it's not self-evident to the reader (e.g. for me),

Ooooh... good you're saying that ... this was not at all the intention

It really should convey "I suspect that ..." 
Will rephrase

```{r}

n_timesteps <- 7 * 2
n_forecast <- 7 * 2

elec_dataset <- dataset(
  name = "elec_dataset",
  
  initialize = function(x, n_timesteps, sample_frac = 1) {
    
    self$n_timesteps <- n_timesteps
    self$x <- torch_tensor((x - train_mean) / train_sd)
    
    n <- length(self$x) - self$n_timesteps - 1
    
    self$starts <- sort(sample.int(
      n = n,
      size = n * sample_frac
    ))
    
  },
  
  .getitem = function(i) {
    
    start <- self$starts[i]
    end <- start + self$n_timesteps - 1
    lag <- 1
    
    list(
      x = self$x[start:end],
      y = self$x[(start+lag):(end+lag)]$squeeze(2)
    )
    
  },
  
  .length = function() {
    length(self$starts) 
  }
)

batch_size <- 32

train_ds <- elec_dataset(elec_train, n_timesteps, sample_frac = 0.5)
train_dl <- train_ds %>% dataloader(batch_size = batch_size, shuffle = TRUE)

valid_ds <- elec_dataset(elec_valid, n_timesteps, sample_frac = 0.5)
valid_dl <- valid_ds %>% dataloader(batch_size = batch_size)

test_ds <- elec_dataset(elec_test, n_timesteps)
test_dl <- test_ds %>% dataloader(batch_size = 1)

```

# Model

> Model-wise, we again encounter the three *modules* familiar from the previous post: encoder, decoder, and top-level seq2seq module. Now, however, there is an additional component: the *attention* module, used by the decoder to obtain *attention weights*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Model-wise, we again encounter the three *modules* familiar from the previous post: encoder, decoder, and top-level seq2seq module. However, there is an additional component: the *attention* module, used by the decoder to obtain *attention weights*.
```

### Encoder

> The encoder still works the same way. It basically just wraps an RNN, and returns the final state of the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The encoder still works the same way. It wraps an RNN, and returns the final state.
```

```{r}
encoder_module <- nn_module(
  
  initialize = function(type, input_size, hidden_size, num_layers = 1, dropout = 0) {
    
    self$type <- type
    
    self$rnn <- if (self$type == "gru") {
      nn_gru(
        input_size = input_size,
        hidden_size = hidden_size,
        num_layers = num_layers,
        dropout = dropout,
        batch_first = TRUE
      )
    } else {
      nn_lstm(
        input_size = input_size,
        hidden_size = hidden_size,
        num_layers = num_layers,
        dropout = dropout,
        batch_first = TRUE
      )
    }
    
  },
  
  forward = function(x) {
    
    x <- self$rnn(x)
    
    # return last states for all layers
    # per layer, a single tensor for GRU, a list of 2 tensors for LSTM
    x <- x[[2]]
    x
    
  }
)
```

### Attention module

> In basic seq2seq, whenever it had to generate a new value, the decoder took into account two things: its prior state, and the previous output generated. In an attention-enriched setup, it additionally receives the complete output from the encoder. In deciding what subset of that output should matter right now, it gets help from a new agent, the attention module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In basic seq2seq, whenever it had to generate a new value, the decoder took into account two things: its prior state, and the previous output generated. In an attention-enriched setup, the decoder additionally receives the complete output from the encoder. In deciding what subset of that output should matter right now, it gets help from a new agent, the attention module.
```

Reviewer: …should matter right now…

What do you mean by "right now" here? As I read the sentence, I don't think you need it, but I could be missing something.

Author: no, I think you're right, will remove

> Attention may be implemented in a number of different ways. Whatever the implementation, the goal is the same: given current decoder state and well as complete encoder outputs, obtain a weighting of those outputs indicative of how relevant they are to what the decoder is currently up to. This procedure results in the so-called *attention weights*: a normalized score, for each time step in the encoding, that quantify its respective importance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of attention is: given current decoder state and well as complete encoder outputs, obtain a weighting of those outputs indicative of how relevant they are to what the decoder is currently up to. This procedure results in the so-called *attention weights*: a normalized score, for each time step in the encoding, that quantify their respective importance.
```

Author: Will skip this:
> Attention may be implemented in a number of different ways. Whatever the implementation, the goal is the same:

because it is less of a rhetorical thing than it might seem (people are likely to run across other ways in other posts, papers ...)

> Here, we show two implementation options, one additive, and one multiplicative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attention may be implemented in a number of different ways. Here, we show two implementation options: one additive, and one multiplicative.
```

Author: done (hadn't seen it was moved before)

> #### Additive variant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Additive attention
```

> In additive attention, encoder outputs and decoder state are commonly either added or concatenated (we choose to do the latter, below). The resulting tensor is run through a linear layer, and a softmax is applied for normalization.

Reviewer: Nice, concise description.

```{r}
attention_module_additive <- nn_module(
  
  initialize = function(hidden_dim, attention_size) {
    
    self$attention <- nn_linear(2 * hidden_dim, attention_size)
    
  },
  
  forward = function(state, encoder_outputs) {
    
    # function argument shapes
    # encoder_outputs: (bs, timesteps, hidden_dim)
    # state: (1, bs, hidden_dim)
    
    # multiplex state to allow for concatenation (dimensions 1 and 2 must agree)
    seq_len <- dim(encoder_outputs)[2]
    # resulting shape: (bs, timesteps, hidden_dim)
    state_rep <- state$permute(c(2, 1, 3))$repeat_interleave(seq_len, 2)
    
    # concatenate along feature dimension
    concat <- torch_cat(list(state_rep, encoder_outputs), dim = 3)
    
    # run through linear layer with tanh
    # resulting shape: (bs, timesteps, attention_size)
    scores <- self$attention(concat) %>% 
      torch_tanh()
    
    # sum over attention dimension and normalize
    # resulting shape: (bs, timesteps) 
    attention_weights <- scores %>%
      torch_sum(dim = 3) %>%
      nnf_softmax(dim = 2)
    
    # a normalized score for every source token
    attention_weights
  }
)

```

> #### Multiplicative variant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Multiplicative attention
```

Author: ok ;-) (again, looking for variation - literally, I guess)

In multiplicative attention, scores are obtained by computing dot products between decoder state and all of the encoder outputs. Here too, a softmax is then used for normalization.

```{r}
attention_module_multiplicative <- nn_module(
  
  initialize = function() {
    
    NULL
    
  },
  
  forward = function(state, encoder_outputs) {
    
    # function argument shapes
    # encoder_outputs: (bs, timesteps, hidden_dim)
    # state: (1, bs, hidden_dim)

    # allow for matrix multiplication with encoder_outputs
    state <- state$permute(c(2, 3, 1))
 
    # prepare for scaling by number of features
    d <- torch_tensor(dim(encoder_outputs)[3], dtype = torch_float())
       
    # scaled dot products between state and outputs
    # resulting shape: (bs, timesteps, 1)
    scores <- torch_bmm(encoder_outputs, state) %>%
      torch_div(torch_sqrt(d))
    
    # normalize
    # resulting shape: (bs, timesteps) 
    attention_weights <- scores$squeeze(3) %>%
      nnf_softmax(dim = 2)
    
    # a normalized score for every source token
    attention_weights
  }
)
```

### Decoder

> Once attention weights have been computed, their actual application is handled by the decoder. Concretely, the aptly named method `weighted_encoder_outputs()` computes a product of weights and encoder outputs, making sure that each output will have appropriate impact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once attention weights have been computed, their actual application is handled by the decoder. Concretely, the aptly named method, `weighted_encoder_outputs()`, computes a product of weights and encoder outputs, making sure that each output will have appropriate impact.
```

Author: >Concretely, the aptly named method, `weighted_encoder_outputs()`, computes

I think that with the commas, I need to add something there, perhaps
> Concretely, the aptly named method in question, `weighted_encoder_outputs()`, computes

Author: no, wait ... why not just

> Concretely, the method in question, weighted_encoder_outputs(), computes

    self$decoder <- decoder_module(type = type, input_size = 2 * hidden_size, hidden_size = hidden_size,
                                   attention_type = attention_type, attention_size = attention_size, num_layers)
    self$n_forecast <- n_forecast
    
  },
  
  forward = function(x, y, teacher_forcing_ratio) {
    
    outputs <- torch_zeros(dim(x)[1], self$n_forecast)$to(device = device)
    encoded <- self$encoder(x)
    encoder_outputs <- encoded[[1]]
    hidden <- encoded[[2]]
    # list of (batch_size, 1), (1, batch_size, hidden_size)
    out <- self$decoder(x[ , n_timesteps, , drop = FALSE], hidden, encoder_outputs)
    # (batch_size, 1)
    pred <- out[[1]]
    # (1, batch_size, hidden_size)
    state <- out[[2]]
    outputs[ , 1] <- pred$squeeze(2)
    
    for (t in 2:self$n_forecast) {
      
      teacher_forcing <- runif(1) < teacher_forcing_ratio
      input <- if (teacher_forcing == TRUE) pred$unsqueeze(3) else y[ , t - 1]
      out <- self$decoder(pred$unsqueeze(3), state, encoder_outputs)
      pred <- out[[1]]
      state <- out[[2]]
      outputs[ , t] <- pred$squeeze(2)
      
    }
    
    outputs
  }
  
)

```

> When instantiating the top-level model, we now have an additional choice: that between additive and multiplicative attention. In the "accuracy" sense of performance, my tests did not show any differences; in the "speed" sense though, the multiplicative variant is a lot faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When instantiating the top-level model, we now have an additional choice: that between additive and multiplicative attention. In the "accuracy" sense of performance, my tests did not show any differences. However, the multiplicative variant is a lot faster.
```

Author: oh, I liked that ...? No? OK... with your suggestion, there is still a hint at that ever-recurring ambiguity in ML talk ...

```{r}
net <- seq2seq_module("gru", input_size = 1, hidden_size = 32, attention_type = "multiplicative",
                      attention_size = 8, n_forecast = n_timesteps)

# training RNNs on the GPU currently prints a warning that may clutter 
# the console
# see https://github.com/mlverse/torch/issues/461
# alternatively, use 
# device <- "cpu"
device <- torch_device(if (cuda_is_available()) "cuda" else "cpu")

net <- net$to(device = device)
```

# Training

> Just like last time, in model training, we have the choice between degrees of teacher forcing. Below, we go with a fraction of 0.0, that is, no forcing at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like last time, in model training, we choose the degree of teacher forcing. Below, we go with a fraction of 0.0, that is, no forcing at all.
```

Reviewer: Technically speaking, "between" can only be applied to two options, and you use "among" for three or more. In this case, I think it's clearer to just say "choose," since it's numerical, and not a choice among options.

Author: oooh yes... crazy how you name things I just was vaguely uncomfortable with

btw I think I'll change to
> we get to choose the degree of teacher forcing

which still indicates the "agency thing" (???)

test_pred3 <- test_preds[[41]]
test_pred3 <- c(rep(NA, n_timesteps + 40), test_pred3, rep(NA, nrow(vic_elec_test) - 40 - n_timesteps - n_forecast))

test_pred4 <- test_preds[[61]]
test_pred4 <- c(rep(NA, n_timesteps + 60), test_pred4, rep(NA, nrow(vic_elec_test) - 60 - n_timesteps - n_forecast))

test_pred5 <- test_preds[[81]]
test_pred5 <- c(rep(NA, n_timesteps + 80), test_pred5, rep(NA, nrow(vic_elec_test) - 80 - n_timesteps - n_forecast))

preds_ts <- vic_elec_test %>%
  select(Demand, Date) %>%
  add_column(
    ex_1 = test_pred1 * train_sd + train_mean,
    ex_2 = test_pred2 * train_sd + train_mean,
    ex_3 = test_pred3 * train_sd + train_mean,
    ex_4 = test_pred4 * train_sd + train_mean,
    ex_5 = test_pred5 * train_sd + train_mean) %>%
  pivot_longer(-Date) %>%
  update_tsibble(key = name)

preds_ts %>%
  autoplot() +
  scale_color_hue(h = c(80, 300), l = 70) +
  theme_minimal()

```

```{r, eval = TRUE, echo = FALSE, layout="l-page", fig.cap="A sample of two-weeks-ahead predictions for the test set, 2014."}
knitr::include_graphics("images/att_preds.png")
```

> Of course, we now can't compare performance to that of previous models in our series, as we've pragmatically redefined the task. The main goal, however, anyway has been to introduce the concept of attention. Specifically, I wanted to show how to *manually* implement the technique -- something that, once you've understood the concept, you may never have to due in practice. Instead, you would likely make use of existing tools that come with `torch` (multi-head attention and transformer modules), tools we may introduce in a future "season" of this series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can't directly compare performance here to that of previous models in our series, as we've pragmatically redefined the task. The main goal, however, has been to introduce the concept of attention. Specifically, how to *manually* implement the technique -- something that, once you've understood the concept, you may never have to due in practice. Instead, you would likely make use of existing tools that come with `torch` (multi-head attention and transformer modules), tools we may introduce in a future "season" of this series.
```

Author: again, removing the stuff I didn't like myself :-)))
